README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# Phydon

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

Estimating maximum growth rates of bacteria from genomic data with
**Phydon**.

# Introduction

Phydon is a R package that estimates maximum growth rates of bacteria
from genomic data. This package implements a method detailed in [Our
paper](), which leverages phylogenetic signals and mechanistic
statistics, specifically [codon usage bias
(CUB)](https://github.com/jlw-ecoevo/gRodon2) (see
[gRodon](https://github.com/jlw-ecoevo/gRodon2) for details of this
mechanistic method), to enhance the accuracy of growth rate estimations.
By integrating these advanced techniques, Phydon provides a robust tool
for microbial growth rate analysis based on genomic information.

# Installation

You can install Phydon from GitHub with:

``` r
if (!requireNamespace("devtools", quietly = TRUE))
  install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("xl0418/Phydon")
```

> \[!IMPORTANT\]  
> Phydon has several essential dependencies, including `gRodon2`, `ape`,
> `Biostrings`, `picante`, etc. Please make sure you have installed
> these packages before using Phydon.

``` r
if (!requireNamespace("BiocManager", quietly = TRUE))
  install.packages("BiocManager")

if (!requireNamespace("devtools", quietly = TRUE))
  install.packages("devtools")

BiocManager::install("Biostrings")
BiocManager::install("coRdon")
install.packages("matrixStats") 

devtools::install_github("jlw-ecoevo/gRodon2")
```

# Usage

Phydon is designed to be user-friendly. The package provides **two
modes** for users to estimate the maximum growth rates of bacteria.

- **Identified genomes**: Users’ genomes are identified in the GTDB
  database and assigned with accession numbers. In this case, Phydon
  will search for the representative genomes of the species that the
  users’ genomes belong to and use the phylogenetic information and
  gRodon to enhance the growth rate predictions.

- **Unidentified genomes**: Users’ genomes are not identified in the
  GTDB database. In this case, user needs to provide a phylogeny tree
  that contains the users’ genomes and the representative genomes in the
  GTDB database. Phydon will compute the phylogenetic distance of users’
  genome to the training data and estimate the maximum growth rates.

## Bacteria and Archaea

Phydon supports both bacteria and archaea. Users can specify the taxon
by setting the argument `tax` to either `bacteria` or `archaea`. The
default is `bacteria`.

## Identified genomes

## Minimal example

When users’ genomes are identified, the argument `user_tree` is not
needed and is set to `NULL` by default. A minimal example illustrate how
to use Phydon is as follows:

``` r
library(Phydon)
# load the example data
data_info <- read.csv(system.file("extdata", "known.csv", package = "Phydon"))

#### To get the directory of the genomic data  ####
#### This is only for internal data as directory of genomic data is ad hoc per user's system ####
#### For user's input data, see below for details ####
genomes <- data_info$accession_no
gene_loc <- c()
for (i in 1:length(genomes)) {
  gene_loc[i] <- system.file("extdata", paste0("known/",genomes[i],"/",genomes[i],".ffn"), package = "Phydon")
}


# Generate some genomes with user picked names.
# The genome sequences are provided.
# In this case, only gRodon estimation will be used.
data_info$gene_loc <- gene_loc
data_info <- rbind(data_info, data.frame(gene_loc = data_info$gene_loc, accession_no = c(1:10)))


# estimate the maximum growth rate
result <- Phydon(data_info)
```

## Input data structure

The input data requires a data frame that contains the following
columns:

The columns are:

- `gene_loc`: the directory of the annotated genomic data. The fasta
  file should be named as the accession number of the genome. For
  example, the fasta file of the genome with the accession number
  `RS_GCF_000024245.1` should be named as `RS_GCF_000024245.1.ffn`.

- `accession_no`: the accession number of the genome that users want to
  predict the growth rate. In this mode, the accession number is
  expected to be in the GTDB database. If the accession number is not in
  the GTDB database, Phydon will treat the genome as a single species
  outside of the GTDB database. In this case, only gRodon predictions
  will be used and other predictions will be set to `NA`. See the
  example code.

- `tmp`: **Optional**. This is used for gRodon predictions. If not
  provided, gRodon will not consider temperature in the predictions.

<details>
<summary>
What the input file looks like
</summary>

| gene_loc                                        | accession_no       |
|-------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| known/RS_GCF_002749895.1/RS_GCF_002749895.1.ffn | RS_GCF_002749895.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_002849855.1/RS_GCF_002849855.1.ffn | RS_GCF_002849855.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_002906655.1/RS_GCF_002906655.1.ffn | RS_GCF_002906655.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_003026105.1/RS_GCF_003026105.1.ffn | RS_GCF_003026105.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_003026475.1/RS_GCF_003026475.1.ffn | RS_GCF_003026475.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_003026815.1/RS_GCF_003026815.1.ffn | RS_GCF_003026815.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_003144035.1/RS_GCF_003144035.1.ffn | RS_GCF_003144035.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_003544875.1/RS_GCF_003544875.1.ffn | RS_GCF_003544875.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_003716875.1/RS_GCF_003716875.1.ffn | RS_GCF_003716875.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_900130105.1/RS_GCF_900130105.1.ffn | RS_GCF_900130105.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_002749895.1/RS_GCF_002749895.1.ffn | 1                  |
| known/RS_GCF_002849855.1/RS_GCF_002849855.1.ffn | 2                  |
| known/RS_GCF_002906655.1/RS_GCF_002906655.1.ffn | 3                  |
| known/RS_GCF_003026105.1/RS_GCF_003026105.1.ffn | 4                  |
| known/RS_GCF_003026475.1/RS_GCF_003026475.1.ffn | 5                  |
| known/RS_GCF_003026815.1/RS_GCF_003026815.1.ffn | 6                  |
| known/RS_GCF_003144035.1/RS_GCF_003144035.1.ffn | 7                  |
| known/RS_GCF_003544875.1/RS_GCF_003544875.1.ffn | 8                  |
| known/RS_GCF_003716875.1/RS_GCF_003716875.1.ffn | 9                  |
| known/RS_GCF_900130105.1/RS_GCF_900130105.1.ffn | 10                 |

</details>

> \[!Note\]  
> The second argument `user_tree` is not needed in this case. Phydon
> will search for the representative genomes of the species that the
> users’ genomes belong to and use the phylogenetic information and
> gRodon to enhance the growth rate predictions.

## Output

The output of Phydon is a **data frame** that contains the following
columns:

- `genome`: the accession number of the genome that users aim to predict
  the growth rate

- `rep_genome`: the representative genome of the species that the genome
  belongs to based on GTDB database; If it is NA, no matched
  representative genomes are found. The genome will be treated as a
  single species outside of the GTDB database.In this case, only gRodon
  predictions will be used. (See example result)

- `species`: the species names of the genome based on GTDB database; If
  it is NA, no matched species are found.

- `neighbor_repgenome_train`: the accession number of the representative
  genome that is most phylogeneitcally close to the genome in the data
  of the package. If it is NA, no matched representative genomes are
  found. The phylogenetic distance of the user’s genome to the database
  is then set to Inf.

- `phy_distance`: the phylogenetic distance of the user’s genome to the
  database. If it is Inf, no matched representative genomes are found.

- `gRodonpred`: the gRodon predictions of the genome based on the
  [gRodon2](https://github.com/jlw-ecoevo/gRodon2).

- `phylopred`: the phylogenetic predictions of the genome based on the
  [picante](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/picante/versions/1.8.2).

- `combopred`: the combined predictions of the genome based on the
  gRodon and phylogenetic predictions. The regression model is trained
  based on the data of the package. See details in the [paper]().

<details>
<summary>
What ‘result’ looks like
</summary>

| genome             | rep_genome         | species                         | neighbor_repgenome_train | phy_distance | gRodonpred | phylopred | combopred |
|--------------------|--------------------|---------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------|------------|-----------|-----------|
| RS_GCF_002749895.1 | RS_GCF_002749895.1 | s\_\_Vibrio fujianensis         | RS_GCF_000621645.1       | 0.12220675   | 1.1346118  | 0.4697509 | 0.4697509 |
| RS_GCF_002849855.1 | RS_GCF_002849855.1 | s\_\_Vibrio azureus             | RS_GCF_900460535.1       | 0.05166449   | 0.4913568  | 0.2783264 | 0.2783264 |
| RS_GCF_002906655.1 | RS_GCF_002906655.1 | s\_\_Vibrio hyugaensis          | RS_GCF_900460535.1       | 0.03447402   | 0.7658604  | 0.2783264 | 0.2783264 |
| RS_GCF_003026105.1 | RS_GCF_003026105.1 | s\_\_Photobacterium sp003026105 | RS_GCF_003025615.1       | 0.16585578   | 1.5986925  | 2.0439385 | 2.0439385 |
| RS_GCF_003026475.1 | RS_GCF_003026475.1 | s\_\_Photobacterium lipolyticum | RS_GCF_003025615.1       | 0.08080289   | 1.4924976  | 1.8805498 | 1.8805498 |
| RS_GCF_003026815.1 | RS_GCF_003026815.1 | s\_\_Photobacterium damselae    | RS_GCF_003025615.1       | 0.15489320   | 0.7407403  | 2.0439385 | 2.0439385 |
| RS_GCF_003144035.1 | RS_GCF_003144035.1 | s\_\_Vibrio albus               | RS_GCF_900460535.1       | 0.15592277   | 0.6097861  | 0.8919112 | 0.8919112 |
| RS_GCF_003544875.1 | RS_GCF_003544875.1 | s\_\_Vibrio alfacsensis         | RS_GCF_900460535.1       | 0.03506859   | 0.6234453  | 0.2783264 | 0.2783264 |
| RS_GCF_003716875.1 | RS_GCF_003716875.1 | s\_\_Vibrio zhugei              | RS_GCF_000621645.1       | 0.18306980   | 0.6364132  | 0.4697509 | 0.4697509 |
| RS_GCF_900130105.1 | RS_GCF_024346755.1 | s\_\_Vibrio aerogenes           | RS_GCF_900460535.1       | 0.17884206   | 1.6145463  | 0.5057288 | 0.5057288 |
| 1                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 1.1346118  | NA        | NA        |
| 2                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 0.4913568  | NA        | NA        |
| 3                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 0.7658604  | NA        | NA        |
| 4                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 1.5986925  | NA        | NA        |
| 5                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 1.4924976  | NA        | NA        |
| 6                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 0.7407403  | NA        | NA        |
| 7                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 0.6097861  | NA        | NA        |
| 8                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 0.6234453  | NA        | NA        |
| 9                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 0.6364132  | NA        | NA        |
| 10                 | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 1.6145463  | NA        | NA        |

</details>

## Unidentified genomes

## Minimal example

When users’ genomes are not identified, the argument `user_tree` is
needed. A minimal example illustrate how to use Phydon is as follows:

``` r
library(Phydon)
# load the example data
data_info <- read.csv(system.file("extdata", "unknown.csv", package = "Phydon"))
# load the example tree
user_tree <- ape::read.tree(system.file("extdata", "usertree.tree", package = "Phydon"))

#### To get the directory of the genomic data  ####
#### This is only for internal data as directory of genomic data is ad hoc per user's system ####
#### For user's input data, see below for details ####
genomes <- data_info$accession_no
gene_loc <- c()
for (i in 1:length(genomes)) {
  gene_loc[i] <- system.file("extdata", paste0("unknown/",genomes[i],"/",genomes[i],".ffn"), package = "Phydon")
}
data_info$gene_loc <- gene_loc


# estimate the maximum growth rate
result <- Phydon(data_info, user_tree)
```

## Input data structure

The input data requires a **data frame** and a **phylogenetic tree**
that contains users genomes:

1.  The data frame has the same columns as mentioned above:

- `gene_loc`: the directory of the annotated genomic data. The annotated
  genomes should be named after genome names. For example, the ffn and
  gff files should be named as `user_genome1.ffn` and
  `user_genome1.gff`.

- `accession_no`: the genome names. For example, `user_genome1`.

- `tmp`: **Optional**. This is used for gRodon predictions. If not
  provided, gRodon will not consider temperature in the predictions.

2.  The phylogenetic tree can be generated by using GTDBTK with the
    command `classify_wf`. See below **Before you start** for details!

## Output data structure

The output of Phydon is the same as the case of identified genomes. The
only difference is that the `species` columns will be `NA` as the
accession numbers are not given.

# Before you start

## Unidentified genomes

> \[!IMPORTANT\]  
> When users’ genomes are not identified, users need to provide a
> phylogenetic tree that contains the users’ genomes and the
> representative genomes in the GTDB database. This process can be done
> by using the
> [GTDBTK](https://ecogenomics.github.io/GTDBTk/index.html). The
> phylogenetic tree can be obtained by running
> [`classify_wf`](https://ecogenomics.github.io/GTDBTk/commands/classify_wf.html)
> command on users’ genomes:

    gtdbtk classify_wf --skip_ani_screen --genome_dir /path/to/genomes --out_dir /output/

> \[!IMPORTANT\]  
> The phylogenetic tree will be generated under the foler
> `/output/classify/`. It is usually named as
> `gtdbtk.bac120.classify.tree.1.tree`. Users then need to use this tree
> as the input of Phydon.

## General requirements for both modes

> \[!IMPORTANT\]  
> For both modes, as gRodon requires annotated genomes, users need to
> annotate the genomes before using Phydon. We recommend using
> [Prokka](https://github.com/tseemann/prokka) for genome annotation.
> Thus, the directory structure of the genomic data should be like this:

- `genefiles/`
  - `genome1/`
    - `genome1.ffn`
    - `genome1.gff`
    - `genome1_CDS_names.txt`
  - `genome2/`
    - `genome2.ffn`
    - `genome2.gff`
    - `genome2_CDS_names.txt`
  - `genome3/`
    - `genome3.ffn`
    - `genome3.gff`
    - `genome3_CDS_names.txt`
  - …

> \[!NOTE\]  
> The `genome1.ffn` is the fasta file of the genome, and the
> `genome1.gff` is the annotation file of the genome. These two files
> can be obtained when annotating genomes. The `genome1_CDS_names.txt`
> is the file that contains the names of the CDSs in the genome. Phydon
> will try to generate this file using `sed` command. If it fails, users
> need to generate this file manually. `sed` is usually available in
> Linux and MacOS. For Windows users, you can install `sed` from
> [here](https://sourceforge.net/projects/gnuwin32/files/sed/4.2.1/).
> See more details in the
> [gRodon2](https://github.com/jlw-ecoevo/gRodon2) package. We recommend
> run Phydon in Linux or MacOS to avoid the potential issues in
> generating the `genome1_CDS_names.txt` file.

# The basic workflow

## Unidentified genomes

1.  Generate the phylogenetic tree `user_tree` using GTDBTK
    `classify_wf`.

2.  Annotate the genomes using Prokka and obtain `.ffn` and `.gff`
    files. Optionally, generate the `genome1_CDS_names.txt` file. Not
    necessary if you run Phydon in Linux or MacOS.

3.  Organize the genomic data in the `genefiles/` directory and generate
    `data_info.csv` file in the structure abovementioned.

4.  Run Phydon with the `data_info.csv` file and the `user_tree`.

## Identified genomes

1.  Annotate the genomes using Prokka and obtain `.ffn` and `.gff`
    files. Optionally, generate the `genome1_CDS_names.txt` file. Not
    necessary if you run Phydon in Linux or MacOS.

2.  Organize the genomic data in the `genefiles/` directory and generate
    `data_info.csv` file in the structure abovementioned..

3.  Run Phydon with the `data_info.csv` file.

# Estimating a large number of genomes in parallel

In some cases, users may have a large number of genomes to estimate.
Here, we provide an example script that can be used to estimate a large
number of genomes in parallel. The script is as follows:

``` r
library(Phydon)
library(foreach)
library(doParallel)

### read the data
data_info <- read.csv(system.file("extdata", "known.csv", package = "Phydon"))

num_cores <- 4
# parallel processing phydon to the data_info
cl <- makeCluster(num_cores)
registerDoParallel(cl)
phydon_res <- foreach(i = 1:nrow(data_info), .combine = rbind, .packages = "Phydon", .errorhandling = 'remove') %dopar% {
  Phydon::Phydon(data_info[i,])
}
stopCluster(cl)

# save
# write.csv(phydon_res, "phydon_prediction_results.csv", row.names=FALSE)
```

# Citation

Commit message:

fix a directory issue in the vignette and README

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# Phydon

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

Estimating maximum growth rates of bacteria from genomic data with
**Phydon**.

# Introduction

Phydon is a R package that estimates maximum growth rates of bacteria
from genomic data. This package implements a method detailed in [Our
paper](), which leverages phylogenetic signals and mechanistic
statistics, specifically [codon usage bias
(CUB)](https://github.com/jlw-ecoevo/gRodon2) (see
[gRodon](https://github.com/jlw-ecoevo/gRodon2) for details of this
mechanistic method), to enhance the accuracy of growth rate estimations.
By integrating these advanced techniques, Phydon provides a robust tool
for microbial growth rate analysis based on genomic information.

# Installation

You can install Phydon from GitHub with:

``` r
if (!requireNamespace("devtools", quietly = TRUE))
  install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("xl0418/Phydon")
```

> \[!IMPORTANT\]  
> Phydon has several essential dependencies, including `gRodon2`, `ape`,
> `Biostrings`, `picante`, etc. Please make sure you have installed
> these packages before using Phydon.

``` r
if (!requireNamespace("BiocManager", quietly = TRUE))
  install.packages("BiocManager")

if (!requireNamespace("devtools", quietly = TRUE))
  install.packages("devtools")

BiocManager::install("Biostrings")
BiocManager::install("coRdon")
install.packages("matrixStats") 

devtools::install_github("jlw-ecoevo/gRodon2")
```

# Usage

Phydon is designed to be user-friendly. The package provides **two
modes** for users to estimate the maximum growth rates of bacteria.

- **Identified genomes**: Users’ genomes are identified in the GTDB
  database and assigned with accession numbers. In this case, Phydon
  will search for the representative genomes of the species that the
  users’ genomes belong to and use the phylogenetic information and
  gRodon to enhance the growth rate predictions.

- **Unidentified genomes**: Users’ genomes are not identified in the
  GTDB database. In this case, user needs to provide a phylogeny tree
  that contains the users’ genomes and the representative genomes in the
  GTDB database. Phydon will compute the phylogenetic distance of users’
  genome to the training data and estimate the maximum growth rates.

## Bacteria and Archaea

Phydon supports both bacteria and archaea. Users can specify the taxon
by setting the argument `tax` to either `bacteria` or `archaea`. The
default is `bacteria`.

## Identified genomes

## Minimal example

When users’ genomes are identified, the argument `user_tree` is not
needed and is set to `NULL` by default. A minimal example illustrate how
to use Phydon is as follows:

``` r
library(Phydon)
# load the example data
data_info <- read.csv(system.file("extdata", "known.csv", package = "Phydon"))

#### To get the directory of the genomic data  ####
#### This is only for internal data as directory of genomic data is ad hoc per user's system ####
#### For user's input data, see below for details ####
genomes <- data_info$accession_no
gene_loc <- c()
for (i in 1:length(genomes)) {
  gene_loc[i] <- system.file("extdata", paste0("known/",genomes[i],"/",genomes[i],".ffn"), package = "Phydon")
}


# Generate some genomes with user picked names.
# The genome sequences are provided.
# In this case, only gRodon estimation will be used.
data_info$gene_loc <- gene_loc
data_info <- rbind(data_info, data.frame(gene_loc = data_info$gene_loc, accession_no = c(1:10)))


# estimate the maximum growth rate
result <- Phydon(data_info)
```

## Input data structure

The input data requires a data frame that contains the following
columns:

The columns are:

- `gene_loc`: the directory of the annotated genomic data. The fasta
  file should be named as the accession number of the genome. For
  example, the fasta file of the genome with the accession number
  `RS_GCF_000024245.1` should be named as `RS_GCF_000024245.1.ffn`.

- `accession_no`: the accession number of the genome that users want to
  predict the growth rate. In this mode, the accession number is
  expected to be in the GTDB database. If the accession number is not in
  the GTDB database, Phydon will treat the genome as a single species
  outside of the GTDB database. In this case, only gRodon predictions
  will be used and other predictions will be set to `NA`. See the
  example code.

- `tmp`: **Optional**. This is used for gRodon predictions. If not
  provided, gRodon will not consider temperature in the predictions.

<details>
<summary>
What the input file looks like
</summary>

| gene_loc                                        | accession_no       |
|-------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| known/RS_GCF_002749895.1/RS_GCF_002749895.1.ffn | RS_GCF_002749895.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_002849855.1/RS_GCF_002849855.1.ffn | RS_GCF_002849855.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_002906655.1/RS_GCF_002906655.1.ffn | RS_GCF_002906655.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_003026105.1/RS_GCF_003026105.1.ffn | RS_GCF_003026105.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_003026475.1/RS_GCF_003026475.1.ffn | RS_GCF_003026475.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_003026815.1/RS_GCF_003026815.1.ffn | RS_GCF_003026815.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_003144035.1/RS_GCF_003144035.1.ffn | RS_GCF_003144035.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_003544875.1/RS_GCF_003544875.1.ffn | RS_GCF_003544875.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_003716875.1/RS_GCF_003716875.1.ffn | RS_GCF_003716875.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_900130105.1/RS_GCF_900130105.1.ffn | RS_GCF_900130105.1 |
| known/RS_GCF_002749895.1/RS_GCF_002749895.1.ffn | 1                  |
| known/RS_GCF_002849855.1/RS_GCF_002849855.1.ffn | 2                  |
| known/RS_GCF_002906655.1/RS_GCF_002906655.1.ffn | 3                  |
| known/RS_GCF_003026105.1/RS_GCF_003026105.1.ffn | 4                  |
| known/RS_GCF_003026475.1/RS_GCF_003026475.1.ffn | 5                  |
| known/RS_GCF_003026815.1/RS_GCF_003026815.1.ffn | 6                  |
| known/RS_GCF_003144035.1/RS_GCF_003144035.1.ffn | 7                  |
| known/RS_GCF_003544875.1/RS_GCF_003544875.1.ffn | 8                  |
| known/RS_GCF_003716875.1/RS_GCF_003716875.1.ffn | 9                  |
| known/RS_GCF_900130105.1/RS_GCF_900130105.1.ffn | 10                 |

</details>

> \[!Note\]  
> The second argument `user_tree` is not needed in this case. Phydon
> will search for the representative genomes of the species that the
> users’ genomes belong to and use the phylogenetic information and
> gRodon to enhance the growth rate predictions.

## Output

The output of Phydon is a **data frame** that contains the following
columns:

- `genome`: the accession number of the genome that users aim to predict
  the growth rate

- `rep_genome`: the representative genome of the species that the genome
  belongs to based on GTDB database; If it is NA, no matched
  representative genomes are found. The genome will be treated as a
  single species outside of the GTDB database.In this case, only gRodon
  predictions will be used. (See example result)

- `species`: the species names of the genome based on GTDB database; If
  it is NA, no matched species are found.

- `neighbor_repgenome_train`: the accession number of the representative
  genome that is most phylogeneitcally close to the genome in the data
  of the package. If it is NA, no matched representative genomes are
  found. The phylogenetic distance of the user’s genome to the database
  is then set to Inf.

- `phy_distance`: the phylogenetic distance of the user’s genome to the
  database. If it is Inf, no matched representative genomes are found.

- `gRodonpred`: the gRodon predictions of the genome based on the
  [gRodon2](https://github.com/jlw-ecoevo/gRodon2).

- `phylopred`: the phylogenetic predictions of the genome based on the
  [picante](https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/picante/versions/1.8.2).

- `combopred`: the combined predictions of the genome based on the
  gRodon and phylogenetic predictions. The regression model is trained
  based on the data of the package. See details in the [paper]().

<details>
<summary>
What ‘result’ looks like
</summary>

| genome             | rep_genome         | species                         | neighbor_repgenome_train | phy_distance | gRodonpred | phylopred | combopred |
|--------------------|--------------------|---------------------------------|--------------------------|--------------|------------|-----------|-----------|
| RS_GCF_002749895.1 | RS_GCF_002749895.1 | s\_\_Vibrio fujianensis         | RS_GCF_000621645.1       | 0.12220675   | 1.1346118  | 0.4697509 | 0.4697509 |
| RS_GCF_002849855.1 | RS_GCF_002849855.1 | s\_\_Vibrio azureus             | RS_GCF_900460535.1       | 0.05166449   | 0.4913568  | 0.2783264 | 0.2783264 |
| RS_GCF_002906655.1 | RS_GCF_002906655.1 | s\_\_Vibrio hyugaensis          | RS_GCF_900460535.1       | 0.03447402   | 0.7658604  | 0.2783264 | 0.2783264 |
| RS_GCF_003026105.1 | RS_GCF_003026105.1 | s\_\_Photobacterium sp003026105 | RS_GCF_003025615.1       | 0.16585578   | 1.5986925  | 2.0439385 | 2.0439385 |
| RS_GCF_003026475.1 | RS_GCF_003026475.1 | s\_\_Photobacterium lipolyticum | RS_GCF_003025615.1       | 0.08080289   | 1.4924976  | 1.8805498 | 1.8805498 |
| RS_GCF_003026815.1 | RS_GCF_003026815.1 | s\_\_Photobacterium damselae    | RS_GCF_003025615.1       | 0.15489320   | 0.7407403  | 2.0439385 | 2.0439385 |
| RS_GCF_003144035.1 | RS_GCF_003144035.1 | s\_\_Vibrio albus               | RS_GCF_900460535.1       | 0.15592277   | 0.6097861  | 0.8919112 | 0.8919112 |
| RS_GCF_003544875.1 | RS_GCF_003544875.1 | s\_\_Vibrio alfacsensis         | RS_GCF_900460535.1       | 0.03506859   | 0.6234453  | 0.2783264 | 0.2783264 |
| RS_GCF_003716875.1 | RS_GCF_003716875.1 | s\_\_Vibrio zhugei              | RS_GCF_000621645.1       | 0.18306980   | 0.6364132  | 0.4697509 | 0.4697509 |
| RS_GCF_900130105.1 | RS_GCF_024346755.1 | s\_\_Vibrio aerogenes           | RS_GCF_900460535.1       | 0.17884206   | 1.6145463  | 0.5057288 | 0.5057288 |
| 1                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 1.1346118  | NA        | NA        |
| 2                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 0.4913568  | NA        | NA        |
| 3                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 0.7658604  | NA        | NA        |
| 4                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 1.5986925  | NA        | NA        |
| 5                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 1.4924976  | NA        | NA        |
| 6                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 0.7407403  | NA        | NA        |
| 7                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 0.6097861  | NA        | NA        |
| 8                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 0.6234453  | NA        | NA        |
| 9                  | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 0.6364132  | NA        | NA        |
| 10                 | NA                 | NA                              | NA                       | NA           | 1.6145463  | NA        | NA        |

</details>

## Unidentified genomes

## Minimal example

When users’ genomes are not identified, the argument `user_tree` is
needed. A minimal example illustrate how to use Phydon is as follows:

``` r
library(Phydon)
# load the example data
data_info <- read.csv(system.file("extdata", "unknown.csv", package = "Phydon"))
# load the example tree
user_tree <- ape::read.tree(system.file("extdata", "usertree.tree", package = "Phydon"))

#### To get the directory of the genomic data  ####
#### This is only for internal data as directory of genomic data is ad hoc per user's system ####
#### For user's input data, see below for details ####
genomes <- data_info$accession_no
gene_loc <- c()
for (i in 1:length(genomes)) {
  gene_loc[i] <- system.file("extdata", paste0("unknown/",genomes[i],"/",genomes[i],".ffn"), package = "Phydon")
}
data_info$gene_loc <- gene_loc


# estimate the maximum growth rate
result <- Phydon(data_info, user_tree)
```

## Input data structure

The input data requires a **data frame** and a **phylogenetic tree**
that contains users genomes:

1.  The data frame has the same columns as mentioned above:

- `gene_loc`: the directory of the annotated genomic data. The annotated
  genomes should be named after genome names. For example, the ffn and
  gff files should be named as `user_genome1.ffn` and
  `user_genome1.gff`.

- `accession_no`: the genome names. For example, `user_genome1`.

- `tmp`: **Optional**. This is used for gRodon predictions. If not
  provided, gRodon will not consider temperature in the predictions.

2.  The phylogenetic tree can be generated by using GTDBTK with the
    command `classify_wf`. See below **Before you start** for details!

## Output data structure

The output of Phydon is the same as the case of identified genomes. The
only difference is that the `species` columns will be `NA` as the
accession numbers are not given.

# Before you start

## Unidentified genomes

> \[!IMPORTANT\]  
> When users’ genomes are not identified, users need to provide a
> phylogenetic tree that contains the users’ genomes and the
> representative genomes in the GTDB database. This process can be done
> by using the
> [GTDBTK](https://ecogenomics.github.io/GTDBTk/index.html). The
> phylogenetic tree can be obtained by running
> [`classify_wf`](https://ecogenomics.github.io/GTDBTk/commands/classify_wf.html)
> command on users’ genomes:

    gtdbtk classify_wf --skip_ani_screen --genome_dir /path/to/genomes --out_dir /output/

> \[!IMPORTANT\]  
> The phylogenetic tree will be generated under the foler
> `/output/classify/`. It is usually named as
> `gtdbtk.bac120.classify.tree.1.tree`. Users then need to use this tree
> as the input of Phydon.

## General requirements for both modes

> \[!IMPORTANT\]  
> For both modes, as gRodon requires annotated genomes, users need to
> annotate the genomes before using Phydon. We recommend using
> [Prokka](https://github.com/tseemann/prokka) for genome annotation.
> Thus, the directory structure of the genomic data should be like this:

- `genefiles/`
  - `genome1/`
    - `genome1.ffn`
    - `genome1.gff`
    - `genome1_CDS_names.txt`
  - `genome2/`
    - `genome2.ffn`
    - `genome2.gff`
    - `genome2_CDS_names.txt`
  - `genome3/`
    - `genome3.ffn`
    - `genome3.gff`
    - `genome3_CDS_names.txt`
  - …

> \[!NOTE\]  
> The `genome1.ffn` is the fasta file of the genome, and the
> `genome1.gff` is the annotation file of the genome. These two files
> can be obtained when annotating genomes. The `genome1_CDS_names.txt`
> is the file that contains the names of the CDSs in the genome. Phydon
> will try to generate this file using `sed` command. If it fails, users
> need to generate this file manually. `sed` is usually available in
> Linux and MacOS. For Windows users, you can install `sed` from
> [here](https://sourceforge.net/projects/gnuwin32/files/sed/4.2.1/).
> See more details in the
> [gRodon2](https://github.com/jlw-ecoevo/gRodon2) package. We recommend
> run Phydon in Linux or MacOS to avoid the potential issues in
> generating the `genome1_CDS_names.txt` file.

# The basic workflow

## Unidentified genomes

1.  Generate the phylogenetic tree `user_tree` using GTDBTK
    `classify_wf`.

2.  Annotate the genomes using Prokka and obtain `.ffn` and `.gff`
    files. Optionally, generate the `genome1_CDS_names.txt` file. Not
    necessary if you run Phydon in Linux or MacOS.

3.  Organize the genomic data in the `genefiles/` directory and generate
    `data_info.csv` file in the structure abovementioned.

4.  Run Phydon with the `data_info.csv` file and the `user_tree`.

## Identified genomes

1.  Annotate the genomes using Prokka and obtain `.ffn` and `.gff`
    files. Optionally, generate the `genome1_CDS_names.txt` file. Not
    necessary if you run Phydon in Linux or MacOS.

2.  Organize the genomic data in the `genefiles/` directory and generate
    `data_info.csv` file in the structure abovementioned..

3.  Run Phydon with the `data_info.csv` file.

# Estimating a large number of genomes in parallel

In some cases, users may have a large number of genomes to estimate.
Here, we provide an example script that can be used to estimate a large
number of genomes in parallel. The script is as follows:

``` r
library(Phydon)
library(foreach)
library(doParallel)

### read the data
data_info <- read.csv(system.file("extdata", "known.csv", package = "Phydon"))
### To get the correct directory of the genomic data on the local computer
genomes <- data_info$accession_no
gene_loc <- c()
for (i in 1:length(genomes)) {
  gene_loc[i] <- system.file("extdata", paste0("known/",genomes[i],"/",genomes[i],".ffn"), package = "Phydon")
}
data_info$gene_loc <- gene_loc



num_cores <- 4
# parallel processing phydon to the data_info
cl <- makeCluster(num_cores)
registerDoParallel(cl)
phydon_res <- foreach(i = 1:nrow(data_info), .combine = rbind, .packages = "Phydon", .errorhandling = 'remove') %dopar% {
  Phydon::Phydon(data_info[i,])
}
stopCluster(cl)

# save
# write.csv(phydon_res, "phydon_prediction_results.csv", row.names=FALSE)
```

# Citation
